### Final Assignment Project Plan  
Maggie Schedl  
The CASE of the Differentially Expressed Genes 

Marine organisms, especially vulnerable larvae, live in a stressful world. However, the effects of multiple stressors on mortality, gene expression, and natural selection are not well known. Larval populations of the Eastern Oyster (_Crassostrea virginica_) were put in a short 24 hour stressor exposure in a multi-part experiment that I will only be analyzing a part of. The stressors used were Coastal Acidification (CA), Sewage Effluent (SE), or both (CASE). Larvae retained in seawater were used as a control. The larvae were then filtered out of their experimental bottle and flash frozen to preserve the DNA and RNA. Other samples of larvae were taken and preserved in formalin for mortality counts and morphological measurements. Genomic DNA is in the process of being analyzed via the exome capture method [EecSeq](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/223735v1). RNA extracted from 1 replicate block of CA, CON, SE, and CASE were sequenced with RNASeq for this analysis.

Goals:  

Determine the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the three treatments (CA, SE, and CASE) as compared to the control larvae. Look for overlap of DEGs between CA, SE and CASE. Broader goals are to see if annotations of DEGs match the exomes captured with the paired EecSeq data. I also want to attempt a Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) to look at co-expressed genes.

Data:
* One population of larvae with 4 different treatments. 16 samples originally, cut down to 12 because of library prep error. Replicates of 3 for each treatment
* Data location will be on the external hard drive and analysis will be on KITT
* Sequences generated by PE Illumina HiSeq by the Novogene company

Methods:

* Check that everything has downloaded correctly (checksum)
* QC of data before trimming, trim adapters and low quality reads, re-check for QC (Fastp) _de-multiplexing is being done by Jon_
* File conversion (HISAT2)
* Align to genome (SAM Tools)
* Assemblly for reference annotation (StringTie)
* Finding differentially expressed genes (DESeq2 and Edge R, I would like to try both)
* Functional enrichment analysis (topGO)
* WGCNA (WGCNA R package)

Many of the steps in the methods section are based off of the [presentation](https://github.com/jpuritz/BIO_594_2019/blob/master/Lectures/Week10/April_3_2019_RNA-seq_INTRO.pptx) by Erin Roberts.
